Okay.
So in this lesson, I'd like to do a quick review of the filter method on an array in JavaScript.
If you are comfortable with filter, you can feel free to skip this lesson and move on to the next one.
Otherwise, join me in the playground dot js file in our source directory.
As a reminder, this playground file is just a scratch pad file.
It's a throwaway file where we can practice various JavaScript and view concepts outside of our main
project.
So I'm just going to write some code here and then run it using Node so we can observe the output.
If you have any content in this file already, you can feel free to delete it.
It's just, for example, for a previous explanation throughout the course.
So let's talk about the filter method on an array.
Let's begin by declaring an array.
I'm just going to declare an array of numbers and I'm going to populate it with a bunch of random numbers.
Let's do 135729 11 and let's do six.
Okay.
So let's say I want to filter or narrow this array down to the numbers that are greater than the number
six.
All right.
So there's only a couple elements that are going to fit that criteria.
Now, seven, nine and 11 are greater than six.
What I want to do is to create a new array consisting of only the elements from the numbers array that
fit that criteria that satisfy that condition of being greater than six.
So using the filter method in JavaScript, I can do just that.
I can filter my original array.
I can create a subset of my original elements based on some criteria.
So the way it works is we call the filter method on an array object.
So numbers that filter, we're going to invoke that method.
And what we pass filter is actually going to be a function.
It's called a predicate function.
So right here, I'm going to declare an arrow function right in line.
And what I'm going to do is I'm going to provide a single parameter to this arrow function.
What JavaScript is going to do is it's going to run this function on every single element of the array
that the filter method is being invoked on.
So in other words, this function that I provide is going to be run on one, then three, then five,
then seven, then two, etc. every element of the array.
And so what I want to provide as my parameter to this function is a name that represents an individual
element in this array.
So I can call this element, I can call this item, I can call this value.
Given that we're iterating over an array of numbers and this parameter name here might be number because
it's the singular version of the plural.
So I'm just going to call it number.
So we're going to iterate over one array element, one number at a time.
What this function must return is a boolean, either true or false.
If the function returns true, then JavaScript will include that element that we're iterating over in
the final array that it constructs.
In comparison, if this function that we provide it returns false, then JavaScript will exclude, or
in other words, leave out the current element that we're iterating over.
So what I want to do here is use automatic returns in JavaScript, and what I simply want to do is use
the greater than operator in JavaScript to compare my number to the value six.
So whatever number I'm iterating over.
I'm going to check whether it is greater than six.
And because I am doing a single line expression, this will be an automatic return in JavaScript.
So right here this will be the automatic implicit return of this function.
So this will evaluate to true or false and that will be immediately returned.
It's no different than if I were to put curly braces here and use the return keyword manually.
It's just a shortcut for doing that.
All right.
So what we're saying here is iterate over every number in our array and filter for only those numbers
that satisfy the condition of being greater than six.
So if I console.log.
The returned value.
It's going to be a new array, a completely new array.
I'm going to run this with node source playgrounds and it's going to be a new array of the number of
seven, nine, 11.
They're going to appear in the exact same order as they were in the original numbers.
Right?
Because JavaScript is literally iterating from element element 135729.
For each one, it's running this function that we passed the filter.
If that function is returning true, which it will for seven, nine and 11, it's going to keep those
elements in a new array.
So we are literally filtering, right?
If you think about the word filter in real life, it means to select a certain subset or limit something,
right?
If you think about a filter in a drain.
Right.
Or a water filter.
A water filter prevents certain bad things from getting into your water at the same idiots it's filtering
out or selecting, choosing which components are going to make it through and which ones are not.
So in this case, it's choosing which numbers are going to make it through those that are greater than
six.
So how does this apply to us?
Well, let me give you another example that's going to be a little bit more relevant for us in what
we're working on.
Let's say I have an array, but instead of numbers, it's going to be an array of objects and I'm going
to call it jobs, very similar to what we have in the real world.
And let's say each job object is going to have two properties.
Title and organization.
So let's write out three jobs here.
My first one is going to have a title of Angular Developer.
My organization here is going to be Microsoft.
And on the next line I will create another job object.
The title for this job will be programmer and the organization is going to be Google.
And then finally, for my third job object on a separate line, I'll have a title of developer and I
will have an organization of Microsoft.
So let's say that I wanted to filter this array of job objects to only those jobs that have an organization
of Microsoft.
So I want to create a subset.
I want to filter this jobs array down from an array of three jobs to a new array of two jobs, two jobs
that both have the organization of Microsoft.
So the object is going to be the exact same.
I'm going to call the filter method on my jobs array.
What I provide to filter is a function for JavaScript to invoke on every individual element.
In this case, every individual element is a whole object.
But I'm going to give it the name job.
All right.
And then what do I want to do with Job?
I want to write some kind of condition here that's going to value it to a boolean.
Right.
So what I want to do is whatever job object I'm editing over at the time, I want to take a look at
its organization property and I want to use the equality operator to check if it is equal to Microsoft.
If this condition evaluates to true, then I want to keep it.
And if this evaluates the false, we're telling JavaScript to not keep it.
Okay.
So again, the function here that you passed the filter must return a boolean.
I'm just implicitly returning it here using yes.
Syntax.
But you're more than welcome to provide curly braces and the return keyword.
So right here I'm going to console.log this new array.
We're not modifying the original array in any way and we're getting back a brand new array.
And when I run this file, you're going to see we're going to get a new array with just two objects.
And what do those two objects have?
They have an organization of Microsoft.
So a JavaScript did is it iterated?
It went over each element in my jobs array and said, hey, object one.
Is your organization equal to Microsoft?
True.
Okay, I'm going to keep you object two.
Is your organization equal to Microsoft?
No, your organization is Google.
That returns false.
I'm going to not keep you.
Third job object is your organization Microsoft?
Yes, it is.
Okay.
I'm going to keep you now.
I have two objects.
I'm going to package them in a new array.
And that's what I'm going to return from the filter method.
Right.
And this is the exact same technique that we're going to use in the very next lesson to filter our big
array of 100 jobs.
So I will see you there.